---
title: DAO interface
category: Persistence
---

The `DAO` interface declares the following methods:

<table class="table table-striped">
	<thead>
		<tr>
			<th>method</th>
			<th>description</th>
		</tr>
	</thead>
	<tbody>
		<tr><td>

`String create(P obj)`</td><td> Persists an object. A new `id` *should* be generated if absent.</td></tr>
		<tr><td>

`P read(String key)`</td><td> Reads an object from the data store for a given `id`. Returns `null` if the object for this `id` is missing.</td></tr>
		<tr><td>

`void update(P obj)`</td><td> Updates an object. Implementations of this method *should* set a timestamp to the field `updated`. </td></tr>
		<tr><td>

`void delete(P obj)`</td><td> Deletes an object completely (the opposite of `create`).</td></tr>
		<tr><td>

`List<P> readAll(List<String> keys, boolean all)`</td><td> Batch operation for `read()`. If `all` is `false`, only the `id` and `type` columns should be returned.</td></tr>
		<tr><td>

`void createAll(List<P> objects)`</td><td> Batch operation for `create()`.</td></tr>
		<tr><td>

`void updateAll(List<P> objects)`</td><td> Batch operation for `update()`.</td></tr>
		<tr><td>

`void deleteAll(List<P> objects)`</td><td> Batch operation for `delete()`.</td></tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

### Optimistic locking

Each `DAO` implementation is responsible for supporting optimistic locking if the underlying database is capable of
performing conditional write operations natively. The `ParaObject` interface contains a `version` field which can be
used to store information about the current version of each object and it's value should be incremented by the database,
if an update operation succeeds. The locking mechanism is simple - the database checks if the supplied object version
matches the one stored in the database. If the two versions match, the update operation is executed, otherwise it fails.
A `version` value of `-1` indicates a failed update and it's the responsibility of the API clients to handle such failures.
If the `version` value is positive, the update has been successful, and `0` means the field is unused or the object
has not been persisted yet.

Optimistic locking is enabled for each `ParaObject` individually by setting its `version` field to a positive value
different than 0. To disable, set the `version` field back to 0.

> A `DAO` object only deals with storing objects in a database. It is not concerned with relationships between objects or
> constraint validation or any other operations like caching, indexing, etc.

### Data consistency and resilience

Para is designed to store data in more than one place - a database and a search index. Both the database and index may
be configured to have multiple replicas of the same data to ensure resilience to data loss. If the database loses its
data, we could still recover it from the search index with `para.read_from_index = true`. If the index is corrupted, we
can simply rebuild it with the request `POST /v1/_reindex`.

Para makes an effort to keep the database and index in sync at all times but there might be occasional failures in
either of the two layers and we end up with inconsistent data. So when an object is indexed but does not appear in the
database, Para will print out a warning log message. If an object is persisted to DB but an error occurs during indexing,
you have the option to set `para.es.fail_on_indexing_errors` (Elasticsearch only). This will cascade an exception back to
the client and it can decide whether to revert the operation or try again. Additionally, if an update operation fails due
to a version mismatch (see optimistic locking above), Para automatically prevents the indexing and caching of that object.
In relation to this, `para.fail_on_write_errors` is `true` by default, which means that if there's any error returned
from the DB on write operations, all subsequent index operations will be skipped.

