---
title: Generic SQL
category: Persistence
---

Besides the default H2 implementation, there's a [generic SQL](https://github.com/Erudika/para-dao-sql) `DAO` plugin
which adds support for all the major RDBMS - MySQL/MariaDB, PostgreSQL and Microsoft SQL Server.
The class `SqlDAO` implements the `DAO` interface is responsible for connecting to an SQL server at a given URL.
All database connections are managed by [HikariCP](https://github.com/brettwooldridge/HikariCP) - a lightweight,
production-ready, JDBC connection pool.

Before you can use this plugin, you need to find an download the right driver for your database. This is a small package
which must be loaded from the classpath along with the plugin and the HikariCP library. You also have to specify the
class name of the loaded driver in the main Para configuration file.

There are several configuration properties for this plugin (these go in your `application.conf` file):

<table class="table table-striped">
	<thead>
		<tr>
			<th>property</th>
			<th>description</th>
		</tr>
	</thead>
	<tbody>
		<tr><td>`para.sql.driver`</td><td> The fully-qualified class name for your SQL driver. Defaults to `null`.</td></tr>
		<tr><td>`para.sql.url`</td><td> The server URL to connect to, **without* the `jdbc:` prefix. Defaults to `null`.</td></tr>
		<tr><td>`para.sql.user`</td><td> The username with access to the database. Defaults to `user`.</td></tr>
		<tr><td>`para.sql.password`</td><td> The DB password. Defaults to `secret`.</td></tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

The plugin is on Maven Central. Here's the Maven snippet to include in your `pom.xml`:

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.erudika</groupId>
  <artifactId>para-dao-sql</artifactId>
  <version>{version}</version>
</dependency>
```

Alternatively you can [download the JAR](https://github.com/Erudika/para-dao-sql/releases) and put it in a
`lib` folder alongside the server JAR file `para-x.y.z.jar`. Para will look for plugins inside `lib` and pick up
the plugin.

**Important:** You must download the appropriate JDBC driver package for your database and put it in the `lib/` folder.
Then you have to set the `loader.path=lib` system property in order to make the Spring Boot launcher add that folder
to the classpath. For example:
```
java -jar -Dconfig.file=./application.conf -Dloader.path=lib  para.jar
```

Finally, set the config property:
```
para.dao = "SqlDAO"
```
This could be a Java system property or part of a `application.conf` file on the classpath.
This tells Para to use the SQL DAO implementation instead of the default.

### Schema

**BREAKING CHANGE:** The schema has changed in v1.30.0 - columns `timestamp` and `updated` were removed,
column `json_updates` was added. `H2DAO` attempts to apply these changes automatically or error, but `SqlDAO` does not.
**Execute the following statements one after another before switching to the new version:**
```sql
ALTER TABLE {app_identifier} DROP COLUMN timestamp, updated;
ALTER TABLE {app_identifier} ADD json_updates NVARCHAR;
```
This is not required for tables created after v1.30.0.

Here's the schema for each table created by Para:
```sql
CREATE TABLE {app_identifier} (
    id						NVARCHAR NOT NULL,
    type					NVARCHAR,
    name					NVARCHAR,
    parentid			NVARCHAR,
    creatorid			NVARCHAR,
    json					NVARCHAR,
    json_updates	NVARCHAR
)
```
